these are the heart of your system
higher I came back to a new laptop
review video and you could probably
assume that it's again AMD rise in 4000
mobile which we took a look at a few
weeks ago with the 4900 HS which was
built inside an asus rog laptop
extremely solid performance and now we
have this xmg apex 15 on my table and
for me outside it kind of reminds me a
little bit of my Nissan GTR and because
if you look inside the car it looks like
from 10 years ago and looks like it's
not really up-to-date anymore but inside
the power is from a different planet xmg
sends some CPUs with it and that's
because this thing works with desktop
CPUs we have arisin 3600 X we have a
3700 X and we also have a 39 50 X so you
can actually put a 39 50 X AMD desktop
16 core CPU inside
this notebook and that's something we
will try today to show it a little bit
more up close and to show and present to
you what kind of product feel you get
with this thing and why I'm comparing it
with my Nissan gt-r if you open it it's
very elegant and clean and if you touch
it it feels like it's a little bit made
of plastic especially if you turn it
around and take a look at the back side
this doesn't really represent I think
the quality or the performance this
thing has this xmg apex 15 by the way is
one of the very first prototypes that's
why I'm not exactly sure or entirely
sure if it will represent 100% the final
product they will certainly make some
changes to the product if it's not 100%
final performance wise it will be final
that's what I told me it also comes with
a 62 what hours battery which can be
easily replaced or removed from the
notebook and everything about the XMP
apex 15 kind of represents that you can
upgrade and change parts easily after
removing the battery and removing the
screws which are surrounding the back
plates you can just slide it up and
remove it and that's really
simple and so much more convenient than
most other notebooks I recently tested
you will straight spot that there are
two and or two slots on this device we
have one already occupied with the 970
Pro and VM e drive with 512 gigabyte we
also have two memory dims on here
currently Corsair Vengeance 2666 C 18
not the fastest memory for sure xmg also
sent me two of those sticks from crucial
16 gigabyte each 3200 unfortunately it's
only CL 22 that's why I quickly decided
to buy my own sticks it's a 3200 CL 16
and this should be really quick and
should help to get a little bit extra
performance out of this thing and we
will quickly insert those
[Music]
I usually use one of those coarser MP
600 SSDs with one terabyte for my
testing have all my benchmarks on it and
because we have a second elbow to slot
anyway I'm just going to install this as
well
[Music]
in addition there's also a harddrive pay
available on the site where you could
install for example eSATA 2.5 inch drive
slots are available on top not going to
use it for nada
[Music]
and underneath the heatsink we can spot
an AMD risin desktop CPU annexed to it
we have an NVIDIA GPU depending on your
exact model it would be an RT X 26 T or
RT X 2070 now you might ask how is it
even possible that we're putting a 3950
x16 core desktop CPU inside one of those
very tiny laptops of course the cooling
solution itself looks nice and good we
have plenty of copper on here we have
six heat pipes in total we have a ton of
surface area on those very very tiny and
thin fins however this can certainly not
replace a desktop cooling unit and the
key to do that is to reduce the TDP of
the 105 what desktop processor to 65
watt and now you might think but if
we're reducing the power consumption by
40 percent aren't we also going to lose
40 percent of performance not exactly
today's processors will not lose
performance in a linear way therefore if
you're reducing the power from like 105
to 65 watt which is about 40 percent you
will maybe lose 20% performance but you
still have 16 cores and we will see how
the performance of this inside a laptop
will be like experts among you might
notice directly that xmg is using a
thermal grisly cry or not which is
something I personally absolutely
appreciate and it will also mean that
you don't really have to open it and
replace a thermal paste because there's
already a very high quality product
underneath the only thing you could do
to upgrade or even increase performance
is applying a liquid metal
however it's again a naked copper not
nickel plated copper which could result
to problems with using liquid metal
however I might have a solution for that
in an upcoming video stay tuned for that
[Music]
do you know what I really appreciate the
fact that I don't have to use Wi-Fi to
install the windows updates I can just
use a cable five minutes and I will be
ready I'm just in between testing spend
about two or three hours right now
trying to get the memory to run which is
not as easy as I thought it would be I
got a special bios version where I have
additional access to like AMD CVS
submenu in the BIOS which is usually not
available but doesn't really matter what
kind of memory speed or memory timings
I'm setting nothing gets really set and
everything and every time it doesn't
work out I have to reset the BIOS which
means I have to open the thing
remove the BIOS battery and everything
so that's not so convenient that's why I
will stop with the memory tuning for now
we'll keep the 2666
C 18 and now I change for some rice
master testing at the moment and really
who made this software I mean in general
I really appreciate that AMD has rised
master it's it's really cool and it's
better than xcu because it gives you
typically more access but the language
in the translation I mean the
translation itself is so wrong from
English to German and then you cannot
change the language I first have to
install it and then go to the install
folder and delete the language files in
order to force it to have English so
annoying really so annoying this is by
the way how the BIOS looks like I mean
you have all the options you have the
PBS and CBS AMD submenu and then you can
go for example to the UMC common options
go to ddr4 common options timing
configurator accept and then you could
theoretically change the clock speed of
the ddr4 modules but it doesn't really
matter what you set doesn't apply it for
me also if you want to change for
example the timings then you have to set
it in hex values which is not really an
issue for me I mean just changing from
hexadecimal it's not really a problem
but it's very inconvenient for normal
users I would say I would just expect to
have normal values here would be much
easier for an end user first quick test
is cinemas are 20 running it while
keeping rising masses are open
we can see directly the CPUs hitting the
TDC and EDC limits 60 amps TDC 90 mc/dc
cpu power is roughly 55 watt which is
not really that much PPT limit is 88
watt it's not reached but TDC and EDC is
maxed out so the CPU cannot consume more
and temperature wise cooling wise this
thing seems to be really good because
we're in the region of about 75 degree
Celsius which means we have about 15 to
20 degrees Celsius left Headroom so if
we can manage to increase TDC and easy
we should be able to get more
performance out of this thing
performance wise with about 7,000 points
really not bad for a laptop considering
that this is like 3900 X desktop
performance that's quite impressive
looking at a single score result 474 is
pretty much in line with the 4900 HS but
multi score is so much higher in rise
master if I go to manual unfortunately I
have no options to change CDC or EDC and
those options but I can enable precision
whose overdrive PBO and there you can
see Tec is set to 114 and EDC to 168 I'm
just going to apply those settings and
try it quickly we can see change from 60
and 90 to 114 and 168 also ppt changed
from 88 to 142 death should help if this
works out correctly well that didn't
really work out well maybe we should try
smaller steps
so 75 TDC 105 EDC we can already see
that we should have higher performance
because previously we didn't exceed 75
degree Celsius now it's about 81 degrees
Celsius 8000 points maybe AMD will come
up with the solution for socket a.m. 5
where this will not be an issue anymore
because yeah I mean for desktop you can
just rotate your cooler slightly to
prevent this but in a notebook it's not
really possible to rotate this cooling
unit before you remove it luckily the
CPU is not damaged but I will replace
the 39 50 X for some tests now with 3700
X let's quickly take a look at some
benchmarks we were starting off with
Cinebench our 20 we already discussed
some of the numbers now in a chart
you can get a better understanding how
to interpret those numbers and stock at
the 39 50 X in the apex 15 is about
7,000 points in our 15 multi which is
basically the same as a 3900 X 12 core
CPU in desktop PC the apex 15 with the
39 50 X with TDC and EDC limits unlocked
which is just what we did we have about
8,000 points which is far ahead of a
3900 X desktop and considering that this
is a lot of very very nice result Adobe
premier 2024 KB rendering about 11
minutes doesn't really change much if
your unlocking TD cdec limits right here
still about one and one and a half
minutes away from 3950 X in a desktop PC
is still very good results now I ask
myself the question how is it with
gaming with the 3950 X having 16 cores
and then we're limiting the power or we
were reducing the power by 40%
I had the theory that it might have a
negative impact on gaming if you would
compare it for example with the 3700 X
which has half the course and then you
don't limit it that much so the
individual course would have more power
eight cores might run at a higher
frequency therefore benchmarking in
gaming might be higher with the CPU that
has a lower amount of course at least
that was my theory first result is with
the 3950 X core frequency in shadow of
the Tomb Raider 1080p typical benchmark
seen all the cores are running somewhere
between 30 640 100 megahertz and if we
change to the 3700 X the result doesn't
really change much it looks pretty much
identical all the cores are also
somewhere between 30 640 100 megahertz
and this gets just confirmed if we were
looking at my benchmarking numbers again
shadow of the Tomb Raider 1080p ultra
settings 3700 X minimum 52 FPS average
71 fps 39 50 X minimum 53 fps and
average 96 fps so there's not really
much of a difference I would say it's
basically the same it's 1 FPS more or
less doesn't really change much
therefore you can even use the 39 50 X
16 core CPU for gaming instead of
using 3,700 X because I thought if you
would buy this for just gaming and not
like productive stuff it might be better
to get a CPU with a lower amount of
course or it also means if you were only
gaming you don't have to buy the 39 50 X
you can also stick with a 3700 X because
it doesn't change much for you for
gaming one more thing I would like to
point out is regarding the m dot 2 slot
I just performed a crystal disk Mike run
with the Samsung 970 Pro SSD which is
inside the first Android tool slot and
this one is running at generation 3
which you can see with the result
however if I changing back to data drive
which is my Corsair
MP 600 in theory if it would be
generation 4 it would be somewhere
between forty five hundred and fifteen
fifty hundred but now it's only fifteen
hundred which means that this strife is
running at generation two only so we
have 200 two slots one one is running
generation three and one is running
generation - do you know what I just
thought how about we drastically improve
cooling performance and see how much you
can theoretically get out of this thing
pretty cool that this thing has a full
HDMI connector I just flipped it around
open to the backside attach the monitor
what about using this liquid nitrogen
container
[Music]
this moment when even the cat is
questioning what the hell I'm doing here
just about zero degrees Celsius and that
should already help because
lowering the temperature also reduces
power consumption of the CPU therefore
this should already yield in more
performance now this is going in the
right direction almost eight thousand
eight hundred points CPU coolers just
sitting at about twenty degrees Celsius
obviously heat transfer through heat
pipes is not the best that's why I would
assume that we have about zero degrees
Celsius at the CPU down there still it's
already helping that the fans don't spin
at all that's quite cool ninety two
hundred points in our fifteen with a
notebook absolutely insane managed to
increase TDC to ninety five and easy to
130 amps and here we have the cooling
result so running happily at about minus
35 degrees Celsius right here so far no
real issues CPU really seems like cold
now we already have plenty of ice down
there especially in the area of the heat
pipes and that's also the reason why we
are going to stop this experiment right
here I don't want to break this machine
I don't think that xmg would appreciate
this but it just shows that if you can
somehow cool a CPU just enough and also
the V RMS of the mainboard
then you can really push a lot all of
those things and even considering that
the V RMS are not made for this at all
it was still able to run 16 cores with
about four point one to four point two
gigahertz through Cinebench or 20 so
much about the xmg apex 15 very
impressive notebook considering that
you're getting desktop performance in a
notebook it's kind of a notebook because
your battery runtime will really suffer
from the performance it's only sixty
five what our battery and the laptop has
230 what PSU therefore you can kind of
do the math that it will not run long
time if you really put a load on to the
machine otherwise technically really
really nice especially that you have so
many options that you can really upgrade
things you have to times Ember to where
you can populate the salts yourself you
can install two memory teams you can
install the SATA hard drive and
everything is really made for doing it
individually
yourself that's something I really
appreciate you can change the CPU to
whatever you want to use the only other
thing I don't really like is the case
the case really feels low-quality and
does not reflect the performance of this
thing it feels like a notebook from 2010
they should really change the case of
this machine it's the case does not
reflect the power and that's really
unfortunate otherwise they could also
improve the BIOS the BIOS itself is cool
that you have some so much access you
can access AMD CBS menu and all this
stuff but you have access to AMD CBS for
adjusting memory and everything which is
really cool but then it would need
further adjustments like changing from
hex values to like decimal values and
just checking if all the memory options
or in general the options even work
because for me I could not really set
the memory timings or memory frequency
which is unfortunate but I think if they
spent more time developing on the bias
I'm sure they can get this working
otherwise absolutely impressive machine
desktop performance for on the way
thanks for joining in and see you next
time bye
[Music]